Add "Key-Value Data" and "SQL" architecture cookbook recipes (#11410)
flutter/website: src/content/app-architecture/cookbook/sql.md

---
title: "Persistent storage architecture: SQL"
description: Create a service to store complex data with SQL
js:
  - defer: true
    url: /assets/js/inject_dartpad.js
---

<?code-excerpt path-base="app-architecture/todo_data_service"?>

Most Flutter applications, 
no matter how small or big they are, 

> may require storing data on the user’s device at some point. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
might require storing data on the user’s device at some point. 
```

Google wordlist says not to use "may" unless it's a legal doc.

For example, API keys, 
user preferences or data that should be available offline.

In this recipe, 
you will learn how to integrate persistent storage for complex data using SQL 
in a Flutter application following the Flutter Architecture design pattern.

To learn how to store simpler key-value data, 
take a look at the Cookbook recipe: 
[Persistent storage architecture: Key-value data][].

To read this recipe, 
you should be familiar with SQL and SQLite. 
If you need help, you can read the [Persist data with SQLite][] recipe 
before reading this one.

This example uses [`sqflite`][] with the [`sqflite_common_ffi`][] plugin, 

> which combined support mobile and desktop. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which combined support for mobile and desktop. 
```

Support for web is provided in the experimental plugin 

> [`sqflite_common_ffi_web`][] but it is not included in this example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`sqflite_common_ffi_web`][] but it's not included in this example.
```

## Example application: ToDo list application

The example application consists of a single screen with an app bar at the top, 
a list of items, and a text field input at the bottom.

<img src='/assets/images/docs/app-architecture/cookbook/todo_app_light.png'
class="site-mobile-screenshot" alt="ToDo application in light mode" >

The body of the application contains the `TodoListScreen`. 
This screen contains a `ListView` of `ListTile` items,
each one representing a ToDo item.
At the bottom, a `TextField` allows users to create new ToDo items 
by writing the task description and then tapping on the “Add” `FilledButton`.

Users can tap on the delete `IconButton` to delete the ToDo item. 

The list of ToDo items is stored locally using a database service, 
and restored when the user starts the application.

:::note
The full, runnable source-code for this example is
available in [`/examples/app-architecture/todo_data_service/`][].
:::

## Storing complex data with SQL

This functionality follows the recommended [Flutter Architecture design][],
containing a UI layer and a data layer. 
Additionally, in the domain layer you will find the data model used.

> - UI layer with `TodoListScreen` and `TodoListViewModel`.
> - Domain layer with `Todo` data class.
> - Data layer with `TodoRepository` and `DatabaseService`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- UI layer with `TodoListScreen` and `TodoListViewModel`
- Domain layer with `Todo` data class
- Data layer with `TodoRepository` and `DatabaseService`
```

  builder: (context, child) {
    return ListView.builder(
      itemCount: widget.viewModel.todos.length,
      itemBuilder: (context, index) {
        final todo = widget.viewModel.todos[index];
        return ListTile(
          title: Text(todo.task),
          trailing: IconButton(
            icon: const Icon(Icons.delete),
            onPressed: () => widget.viewModel.delete.execute(todo.id),
          ),
        );
      },
    );
  },
)
```

The list of ToDo items is defined in the `TodoListViewModel`, 
and loaded by the `load` Command. 
This method calls the `TodoRepository` and fetches the list of ToDo items.

<?code-excerpt "lib/ui/todo_list/viewmodel/todo_list_viewmodel.dart (TodoListViewModel)"?>
```dart
List<Todo> _todos = [];

List<Todo> get todos => _todos;

Future<Result<void>> _load() async {
  try {
    final result = await _todoRepository.fetchTodos();
    switch (result) {
      case Ok<List<Todo>>():
        _todos = result.value;
        return Result.ok(null);
      case Error():
        return Result.error(result.error);
    }
  } on Exception catch (e) {
    return Result.error(e);
  } finally {
    notifyListeners();
  }
}
```

> When the `FilledButton` is pressed, 
> it executes the `add` Command, 
> passing in the text controller value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pressing the `FilledButton`,
executes the `add` command
and passes in the text controller value.
```

The `createTodo()` method returns the newly created ToDo, 
which is then added to the `_todo` list in the view model.

ToDo items contain a unique identifier generated by the database. 
This is why the view model doesn’t create the ToDo item, 
but rather the `TodoRepository` does.

<?code-excerpt "lib/ui/todo_list/viewmodel/todo_list_viewmodel.dart (Add)"?>
```dart
Future<Result<void>> _add(String task) async {
  try {
    final result = await _todoRepository.createTodo(task);
    switch (result) {
      case Ok<Todo>():
        _todos.add(result.value);
        return Result.ok(null);
      case Error():
        return Result.error(result.error);
    }
  } on Exception catch (e) {
    return Result.error(e);
  } finally {
    notifyListeners();
  }
}
```

Finally, the `TodoListScreen` also listens to the result in the `add` Command.
When the action completes, the `TextEditingController` is cleared.

<?code-excerpt "lib/ui/todo_list/widgets/todo_list_screen.dart (Add)"?>
```dart
void _onAdd() {
  // Clear the text field when the add command completes.
  if (widget.viewModel.add.completed) {
    widget.viewModel.add.clearResult();
    _controller.clear();
  }
}
```

> When a user taps on the IconButton in the ListTile, the delete Command is executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user taps on the `IconButton` in the `ListTile`, the delete command is executed.
```

<?code-excerpt "lib/ui/todo_list/widgets/todo_list_screen.dart (Delete)" replace="/trailing: //g;/^\),$/)/g"?>
```dart
IconButton(
  icon: const Icon(Icons.delete),
  onPressed: () => widget.viewModel.delete.execute(todo.id),
)
```

Then, the view model calls the `TodoRepository.deleteTodo()` method, 
passing the unique ToDo item identifier. 

> If the result is correct, 
> the ToDo item is then removed from the view model, 
> and so removed from the screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A correct result removes the ToDo item from the view
model *and* the screen.
```

<?code-excerpt "lib/ui/todo_list/viewmodel/todo_list_viewmodel.dart (Delete)"?>
```dart
Future<Result<void>> _delete(int id) async {
  try {
    final result = await _todoRepository.deleteTodo(id);
    switch (result) {
      case Ok<void>():
        _todos.removeWhere((todo) => todo.id == id);
        return Result.ok(null);
      case Error():
        return Result.error(result.error);
    }
  } on Exception catch (e) {
    return Result.error(e);
  } finally {
    notifyListeners();
  }
}
```

### Todo list domain layer

The domain layer of this example application contains the ToDo item data model.

Items are presented by an immutable data class. 

> In this case, the application uses the freezed package to generate the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the application uses the `freezed` package to generate the code.
```

The class has two properties, an id represented by an `int`, 
and a task description, represented by a `String`.

<?code-excerpt "lib/business/model/todo.dart (Todo)"?>
```dart
@freezed
class Todo with _$Todo {
  const factory Todo({
    /// The unique identifier of the Todo item.
    required int id,

    /// The task description of the Todo item.
    required String task,
  }) = _Todo;
}
```

### Todo list data layer

The data layer of this functionality is composed of two classes, 
the `TodoRepository` and the `DatabaseService`.

The `TodoRepository` acts as the source of truth for all the ToDo items. 
View models must use this repository to access to the ToDo list, 
and it should not expose any implementation details on how they are stored.

Internally, the `TodoRepository` uses the `DatabaseService`, 
which implements the access to the SQL database using the `sqflite` package.

> You can implement the same DatabaseService using other storage packages like sqlite3, drift or even cloud storage solutions like firebase_database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can implement the same `DatabaseService` using other storage packages 
like `sqlite3`, `drift` or even cloud storage solutions like `firebase_database`.
```

      await _database.open();
    }
    return _database.insert(task);
  }

  Future<Result<void>> deleteTodo(int id) async {
    if (!_database.isOpen()) {
      await _database.open();
    }
    return _database.delete(id);
  }
}
```

The `DatabaseService` implements the access to the SQLite database 
using the `sqflite` package.

It’s a good idea to define the table and column names as constants 
to avoid typos when writing SQL code.

<?code-excerpt "lib/data/services/database_service.dart (Table)"?>
```dart
static const _kTableTodo = 'todo';
static const _kColumnId = '_id';
static const _kColumnTask = 'task';
```

The `open()` method opens the existing database, 
or creates a new one if it doesn’t exist.

<?code-excerpt "lib/data/services/database_service.dart (Open)"?>
```dart
Future<void> open() async {
  _database = await databaseFactory.openDatabase(
    join(await databaseFactory.getDatabasesPath(), 'app_database.db'),
    options: OpenDatabaseOptions(
      onCreate: (db, version) {
        return db.execute(
          'CREATE TABLE $_kTableTodo($_kColumnId INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT, $_kColumnTask TEXT)',
        );
      },
      version: 1,
    ),
  );
}
```

> Note that the column `id` is set as `primary key` and `autoincrement`, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the column `id` is set as `primary key` and `autoincrement`;
```

this means that each newly inserted item 

> will be assigned a new value for the `id` column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is assigned a new value for the `id` column.
```

The `insert()` method creates a new ToDo item in the database, 
and returns a newly created Todo instance. 
The `id` is generated as mentioned before.

<?code-excerpt "lib/data/services/database_service.dart (Insert)"?>
```dart
Future<Result<Todo>> insert(String task) async {
  try {
    final id = await _database!.insert(_kTableTodo, {
      _kColumnTask: task,
    });
    return Result.ok(Todo(id: id, task: task));
  } on Exception catch (e) {
    return Result.error(e);
  }
}
```

> All the `DatabaseService` operations use the [Result][] class to return a value,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the `DatabaseService` operations use the [`Result`][] class to return a value,
```

as recommended by the [Flutter architecture recommendations][]. 
This facilitates handling errors in further steps in the application code.

The `getAll()` method performs a database query, 
obtaining all the values in the `id` and `task` columns.

> For each entry, it will create a `Todo` class instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each entry, it creates a `Todo` class instance.
```

<?code-excerpt "lib/data/services/database_service.dart (GetAll)"?>
```dart
Future<Result<List<Todo>>> getAll() async {
  try {
    final entries = await _database!.query(
      _kTableTodo,
      columns: [_kColumnId, _kColumnTask],
    );
    final list = entries
        .map(
          (element) => Todo(
            id: element[_kColumnId] as int,
            task: element[_kColumnTask] as String,
          ),
        )
        .toList();
    return Result.ok(list);
  } on Exception catch (e) {
    return Result.error(e);
  }
}
```

The `delete()` method performs a database delete operation 
based on the ToDo item `id`.

In this case, if no items were deleted an error is returned, 
indicating that something went wrong.

<?code-excerpt "lib/data/services/database_service.dart (Delete)"?>
```dart
Future<Result<void>> delete(int id) async {
  try {
    final rowsDeleted = await _database!
        .delete(_kTableTodo, where: '$_kColumnId = ?', whereArgs: [id]);
    if (rowsDeleted == 0) {
      return Result.error(Exception('No todo found with id $id'));
    }
    return Result.ok(null);
  } on Exception catch (e) {
    return Result.error(e);
  }
}
```

> ::note

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note
```

> In some cases, you may want to close the database when you are done with it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases, you might want to close the database when you are done with it. 
```

For example, when the user leaves the screen, 
or after a certain time has passed. 

This depends on the database implementation 
as well as your application requirements. 
It’s recommended that you check with the database package authors 
for recommendations.

> ::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::
```

    // Initialize FFI SQLite
    sqfliteFfiInit();
    databaseService = DatabaseService(
      databaseFactory: databaseFactoryFfi,
    );
  } else {
    // Use default native SQLite
    databaseService = DatabaseService(
      databaseFactory: databaseFactory,
    );
  }

  runApp(
    MainApp(
// ···
      todoRepository: TodoRepository(
        database: databaseService,
      ),
    ),
  );
}
```

Then, when the `TodoListScreen` is created, 
also create the `TodoListViewModel` 
and pass the `TodoRepository` to it as dependency.

<?code-excerpt "lib/main.dart (TodoListScreen)" replace="/body: //g;/^\),$/)/g"?>
```dart
TodoListScreen(
  viewModel: TodoListViewModel(
    todoRepository: widget.todoRepository,
  ),
)
```

[Commands]:/app-architecture/cookbook/command
[Flutter Architecture design]:/app-architecture
[Flutter architecture recommendations]:/app-architecture
[MVVM pattern]:/get-started/fundamentals/state-management#using-mvvm-for-your-applications-architecture
[Persist data with SQLite]:/cookbook/persistence/sqlite
[Persistent storage architecture: Key-value data]:/app-architecture/cookbook/key-value-data

> [Result]:/app-architecture/cookbook/result

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`Result`]:/app-architecture/cookbook/result
```
